Hello everyone and welcome to the lecture on functions.
Now before it gets started actually programming out functions I want to make a quick note as far as
the semantics we're gonna be using for this lecture.
There is a technical difference between methods and functions.
And there's another term also known as procedures.
We're going to be using the term function for is to describe the idea of having a piece of code that
can take an input or parameters perform an operation and then produce some sort of an output.
Now there may be some confusion of these terms of method versus function versus procedure depending
on what your background is.
If you're a heavy Java user or if you're a heavy Python user you're going to have in the back of your
mind different ideas of what those terms actually mean.
So in order to clear any confusion up there are links as a resource in this lecture that show you how
to actually describe the more technical differences between the term method versus the term function
in Java and the Scala programming languages.
So I just wanted to make that quick note before we get started.
But from now on we're going to go ahead and refer to these things as functions even though maybe here
a Java user in the back of your mind you may refer them more as methods.
So let's go ahead and get started by jumping to the Adam text editor right here and at the text editor.
Now functions are going to allow us to do is to easily reuse and call code segments.
So let's go ahead and show you a simple example of this method or function pending on how you want to
think about this.
What we can use the DFA keyword and then we're going to go ahead and put in the name of what we want
our function to be.
In this case we're going to start a very simple function.
So we'll say simple close parentheses.
Then you have a colon.
And in this case you're going to put in the data type you expect the output to be as a general data
type and just say units is equal to curly brackets.
And then we'll go ahead and execute some blocks of code.
In this case we'll say prints line and we'll say simple prints.
And then to actually call that function.
We say simple close parentheses.
So we go ahead and just run this and then break down all we have here.
So notice we get simple it's just this unit and we say simple prints which is the output here.
So basically we have is this the keyword the name of this function or method depending on how you want
to think about this close parentheses.
And later on we're actually going to put inputs into those parentheses a colon and then here per unit.
We're going to eventually do is replace that with the type of output the data type output that we expect
equals to.
And then inside these curly brackets whatever lines of code you want to execute.
So let's go ahead and expand this topic by creating a very simple addition function.
So I'm going to clear this up will say D F and say atter.
And this is going to take in two arguments number one and number two and I can go ahead and specify
using a colon here.
What I expect each data type to be.
So I expect this to be an integer when I receive it for number one.
So I have a colon and then the data type.
And then for number 2 colon I expect this to be an integer as well.
And then I'm going to go ahead and have a colon here and then I'm going to say ints equals curly brackets.
And then I have the return keyword and I can go ahead and return the result.
In this case I'm just going to add one plus two.
Let's go ahead and call this run and then break down what's happening here.
So go ahead and say four and five and we'll save that clue this console and run it.
OK.
So what we get we get at her.
It says it expects no one as an integer.
Number two is an integer.
And then the output should also be an integer.
So we get as a result four plus five is nine.
So if you're coming in from a language as Python you may find this idea strange that you're specifying
the data types of the inputs and outputs.
But this is actually pretty nice when you're doing large blocks of code and you're going to have to
do some debugging.
It's going to become really obvious what the errors are because you specified just the beginning what
data types are expected to be the input versus the output.
So for instance if I pass in a string here such as four and 5 Let's go ahead and save that and run it.
Note that we get an error so I'll say type mismatch.
And Ill say it required an integer but it found a string.
Now that's not to say we can actually perform this operation of four plus five strings if I come down
here to Skala.
If I were to just literally type four plus five here it would concatenate those strings together into
45.
So technically this line of code still works.
What saved us as far as tracking this sort of error is the fact that we define what we wanted the input
data types to be.
So hopefully you can change your mindset if you haven't seen this sort of thing before you actually
realize this is pretty beneficial if you're going to be dealing with large code blocks and you're going
to be doing some debugging later on.
So this is actually a positive not a negative.
Now it may take a little more time to develop your code since you're declaring data types but hopefully
you see the benefit.
Now let's go ahead and perform another function here.
Going to go in and clear this.
Let's set up this method or function will say if I'm going to say great name and by convention we usually
have these function names to be lowercase.
And if you want another word in there either you use an underscore or you just go ahead and type the
next word of a capital letter.
So you say great name and I expect an input.
We'll go ahead and call the variable name and it should be a string.
We'll have a call in here and expect the output to be a string.
Since all I want to return is just hello.
And then this person's name I will say equal sign curly brackets.
And then I'm going to execute some code in this case I'm going to go ahead and return and I will say
hello dollar sign name and I should print out basically Hello.
The whatever name I put in.
So let's go ahead and say thou is equal to.
We'll go ahead and say fool.
Great.
And then I'm going to say greets name Jose.
And then I can actually create line for Greeks.
So let's go ahead and run this and see what happens and it clears council again.
So I get full greets and then Hello Jose.
So what I'm actually doing here is using this return to value and saving it as a value full greets and
then seeing that result.
So I'm saving the result of this function with this input to this value for greets and then imprinting
that value out.
Let me go ahead and work on a more complicated function that will check if a number is prime.
So this will be our final example we'll go in and say D E F and I will say is prime.
And let's go ahead and put in a number we want to check Sol say numb check and I expect this to be an
integer because it doesn't make sense to test floating point or double numbers for being prime or not.
And then we're going to go ahead and say we want a boolean.
So I want true or false is this number prime.
So say boolean equal to and then let's go ahead and do some very simple logic for checking if there
is a prime number.
This is not the best way to do this.
This is known as the naive solution or checking for numbers prime.
Scientists say for n Remember we have this sort of error notation and I will say range from two to the
name check.
I will go ahead and say if numb check maade N is equal to zero.
Then I know the number will go ahead and put a boolean here.
So we'll go ahead and write false here.
And then finally outside of this if that return never occurs then I'm going to go ahead and say return.
True.
So let's clarify that this actually worked and test it out.
Well Saint print line is prime.
It's going it took a number that we know is not prime.
So I'll say this should be false not prime.
And then we'll say prints line is prime for number that we do know as prime such as 23.
So this should return TRUE looks.
So let's go in and save this.
Run it and then we'll break it down to you run it.
So looks like we get false and true as we expected.
Great.
So let's go ahead and say what's going on here.
We find the if is prime we expect number check to be an integer and we want the output to be a boolean.
Then for every number from range to up to the integer the number we're actually checking and we're going
to check if that number is divisible by one of these values.
And if it has a remainder of 0 then we know that it is not prime because the definition of a prime number
is that it can only be evenly divided by 1 or itself.
So if this return never occurs then we go all the way out here to outside of this for loop and they'll
return true.
So basically once this returns everything else will be essentially jumped out over that line the for
loop will break and we're good here.
OK.
So let's go ahead and show you how you can use some collections for functions.
So let's go out and clear this and show you just two more simple examples.
As far as using collections or functions sung in the same vowel numbers is equal to list 1 2 3 7.
And I'm going to go ahead and just show you how you can run through a list like this.
So if you say some sort of check and say numbs and you're expecting a collection such as a list well
you'll have to do is actually passing a code that looks like this so you'll say list and then in square
brackets what you expect to be in that list.
Let me show you what I mean by that by running this scul interpreter code.
So if I say valid numbers is equal to list 1 to 3.
Notice what scholar will put out here it says it's a list that contains integers.
Meaning when you're specifying the data type here inside of this method or function you're going to
have to say list and what kind of data you expect to find inside of that list.
Meaning I can then also return a list of integers and say equals to close brackets.
Let's just go ahead and return that same list so say return numbers.
We'll go ahead and print line of check numbers AUPs save this and run it.
Let's go and run load.
There you go.
OK.
So this went ahead and created that function ran that function and it returned a list and because the
point of this is just to show you that you can't just say something like it's here.
Otherwise you'll get an error.
So I save this and run it again.
Note here that I get an error because it says Type Mismatch found integer but expect that a list of
integers so this sort of bracket notation is what you need to use.
And if you ever get confused on how to actually write this out as far as what term should be inside
of this list.
A nice way of checking that is to go straight to your Skoll interpreter and let's say you wanted a list
of boolean values so something like.
True false.
You can run that in and then Skala will tell you what the data type is.
So then you could just copy and paste that into your function or method of code.
All right.
That is it for functions.
Coming up next is going to be your final programming task for this Scala programming basics section.
We're going to actually ask you just a few questions and test your skills.
Coming up next an overview of those questions.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.